Overview And Learning Goal
==========================

This section defines the learning target precisely.


What This Manual Covers
-----------------------

By the end of the exercise, the reader should understand five separate
things:

1. the data tree,
2. the config tree,
3. the branch chain,
4. the difference between detection and mutation,
5. the meaning of backend grouping for PQC.

If any of these are missing, it is possible to repeat commands
mechanically but will not be able to debug or extend the workflow.


The Stages In Plain Terms
-------------------------

The pipeline is easiest to learn as four distinct operations.

Stage 1: ingest
  Build a canonical pulsar directory tree from whatever raw layout the source
  data currently lives in.

Stage 2: first FixDataset pass
  Normalize flags, insert missing jumps, prune stale jumps, optionally create
  variant products, and commit those edits to a new branch.

Stage 3: PQC detect run
  Run tempo2 and QC detectors to produce review products. This stage should
  usually not edit the data files.

Stage 4: QC apply run
  Read the QC products from Stage 3 and comment or delete selected TOAs. Start
  with comment-only.


Minimum Single-Pulsar Story
---------------------------

For one pulsar, the simplest robust story is:

1. ingest raw files into a canonical tree,
2. create a branch with system flags and jumps in place,
3. run tempo2 and PQC on that branch,
4. inspect QC outputs,
5. apply comments to flagged TOAs on a new branch,
6. rerun if needed.

This is slower than a one-line workflow, but it keeps the stage boundaries
clear.


Stage Output Matrix
-------------------

The four stages write different kinds of outputs. Keeping them separate is one
of the main design strengths of the workflow.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 18 16 16 16 34

   * - Stage
     - Mutates dataset branch
     - Writes run outputs
     - Writes QC outputs
     - Main purpose
   * - ingest
     - yes
     - limited
     - no
     - build canonical pulsar tree from raw source layout
   * - Step 1 FixDataset
     - yes
     - yes
     - no
     - normalize flags, maintain jumps, generate variants
   * - Step 2 detect
     - usually yes, but not through QC action
     - yes
     - yes
     - run tempo2 and PQC, generate review products
   * - Step 3 apply
     - yes
     - yes
     - no new detection
     - apply chosen QC action policy to a new branch


Glossary
--------

``backend``
  A canonical observing-system identity used in filenames, grouping, and often
  jump logic. During ingest this is defined explicitly by the mapping file.

``system flag`` / ``-sys``
  A tim-file flag used to represent system identity after harmonization. It is
  often used both for jump maintenance and as a QC grouping column.

``group``
  A broader grouping label than an individual backend in some datasets. In some
  analyses it is used as the QC grouping column instead of ``sys``.

``branch``
  A git branch in the canonical dataset repository. Branches capture dataset
  mutation history across ingest, FixDataset passes, and apply stages.

``run directory``
  A directory under ``results_dir`` containing outputs from one invocation:
  resolved config, summaries, plots, QC tables, and logs.

``detect stage``
  A run that produces QC evidence and diagnostics without using QC outputs as
  mutation instructions.

``apply stage``
  A later FixDataset run that reads previously generated QC outputs and turns
  selected QC columns into comments or deletions.

``variant``
  An alternate include or reference product generated by FixDataset using the
  configured classification and variant catalogs.

``reference_branch``
  The branch used as a comparison anchor and, in practice, often the branch
  that the run is organized around.

``pqc_backend_col``
  The QC grouping column forwarded to PQC. This choice controls how many
  thresholds and summaries are interpreted.


Why PQC Exists
--------------

PQC is often misunderstood as "a tool that removes bad TOAs." That is not the
right mental model.

PQC is used because single-pulsar timing data often contains behavior that
should be reviewed explicitly:

- isolated bad measurements,
- backend-specific outliers,
- step-like changes,
- DM-like step changes,
- solar-angle systematics,
- orbital-phase structure,
- transient-like events.

The job of PQC is to create evidence and diagnostics. The job of the operator
is to decide what action, if any, should follow.


Why FixDataset Exists
---------------------

FixDataset and PQC are easy to conflate if the stage boundary is not explained.

FixDataset is the mutation layer. It is used to:

- normalize ``-sys``, ``-group``, and ``-pta`` flags,
- insert jumps that should exist but do not,
- prune jumps that no longer correspond to data,
- enforce a baseline parfile policy,
- generate consistent ``_all.tim`` variants,
- apply QC decisions back to tim files.

PQC flags things. FixDataset changes things.


Non-Destructive First Rule
--------------------------

For a first workflow:

- do not delete TOAs immediately,
- use new branches for each mutation pass,
- use ``fix_qc_action = "comment"`` first,
- preserve the previous branch so outputs can be diffed across stages.

This is the safest way to teach cause and effect.


The End State
-------------

For one pulsar, a good final target is:

- one ingest mapping JSON,
- one ingest run profile,
- one first-pass FixDataset profile,
- one PQC detection profile,
- one QC-apply profile,
- optionally one workflow file that chains those steps.

That gives the student a reproducible, inspectable path from raw inputs to a
reviewable cleaned branch.


Related Documentation
---------------------

Use these pages alongside this playbook:

- full configuration behavior and precedence: :doc:`../configuration`
- key-by-key strategy guidance: :doc:`../configuration_reference`
- operational grouping of settings: :doc:`../pleb_deep_dive/config_groups`
- detailed stage flow: :doc:`../pleb_deep_dive/stage_flow`
- tempo2 and QC runtime notes: :doc:`../pleb_deep_dive/tempo2_qc_reporting`
