Configuration Layout
====================

This chapter is the standard map of the ``configs/`` tree and explains how to
place, name, and maintain configuration files in a way that scales for
production operations.

If you only need key descriptions, use :doc:`full_settings_catalog`.
If you need stage behavior, use :doc:`pleb_deep_dive`.


Purpose
-------

PLEB keeps authored configuration separate from generated state.

The goal is to avoid common failure modes:

- policy duplicated across many run files,
- generated lock files mixed with authored files,
- unclear ownership between run profiles, catalogs, and workflow run plans.


Canonical Tree
--------------

.. code-block:: text

   configs/
     runs/
       ingest/
       fixdataset/
       pqc/
       pipeline/
     workflows/
       steps/
     catalogs/
       ingest/
       public_releases/
       system_flags/
       system_tables/
       variants/
     rules/
       overlap/
       relabel/
       pqc/
     schemas/
     state/
       lockfiles/
     settings/  # legacy


Directory Roles
---------------

``configs/runs/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Runnable mode profiles passed to ``pleb --config``.

Use this for execution context:

- stage toggles,
- branch names,
- paths to catalogs/rules,
- run-local choices (for example detection profile selection).

Do not use this for reusable mapping data that many profiles share.

``configs/workflows/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Top-level workflow run-plan files passed to
``pleb workflow --file ...``.

Use this for:

- stage sequencing (serial/parallel groups),
- step-to-step branch hand-off,
- step overrides.

``configs/workflows/steps/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reusable step configuration fragments used by workflows.

Use this for shared step templates so workflows remain concise and easy to
review.

``configs/catalogs/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reusable data assets.

These are stable tables/mappings that multiple runs consume.

Subfolders:

- ``ingest/``: ingest mapping JSON files.
- ``public_releases/``: provider catalog for public release comparison.
- ``system_flags/``: editable mapping/allowlist/rule sources for
  system/telescope/backend inference.
- ``system_tables/``: lookup tables used by fix/legacy behaviors
  (bandwidths, jump maps, overlaps, PTA labels).
- ``variants/``: backend classification and ``<PSR>_<variant>_all.tim``
  definitions.

``configs/rules/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Declarative behavior policies.

Subfolders:

- ``overlap/``: overlap resolution policies.
- ``relabel/``: backend/system relabel policies.
- ``pqc/``: per-backend PQC profile overrides.

``configs/schemas/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Machine-readable schema files for tooling and GUI integration.

``configs/state/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Generated runtime state (currently ingest lock snapshots/validation).

Treat this as generated reproducibility metadata, not authored policy.

``configs/settings/``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reserved. Current code and documentation use ``configs/runs/``,
``configs/workflows/``, ``configs/catalogs/``, ``configs/rules/``, and
``configs/state/``.


What Goes Where
---------------

Use this decision rule:

1. Is it directly executed with ``--config``?
   Put it under ``configs/runs/<mode>/``.
2. Is it a multi-step run-plan file?
   Put it under ``configs/workflows/``.
3. Is it static mapping/lookup data reused by many runs?
   Put it under ``configs/catalogs/<domain>/``.
4. Is it a policy rule set (behavior choice)?
   Put it under ``configs/rules/<domain>/``.
5. Is it generated by run tooling?
   Put it under ``configs/state/``.


Naming Guidelines
-----------------

Run profiles
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use ``<mode>_<intent>.toml``.

Examples:

- ``fixdataset_par_defaults.toml``
- ``pqc_balanced.toml``
- ``ingest_epta_data.toml``

Workflow files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use ``<scope>_<intent>.toml``.

Examples:

- ``branch_chained_fix_pqc_variants.toml``
- ``j1713_j1022_stress_parallel_serial.toml``

Catalog and rule files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use ``<domain>_<scope>.<ext>`` where practical.

Examples:

- ``backend_classifications_legacy_new.toml``
- ``system_flag_mapping.ingest_epta_data.json``
- ``backend_profiles.example.toml``


Path Conventions
----------------

Prefer repository-relative paths for files inside this repo:

- ``configs/catalogs/ingest/ingest_mapping_epta_data.json``
- ``configs/rules/pqc/backend_profiles.example.toml``

Use absolute paths only for external source trees and environment-specific
locations.

Recommended split:

- external data roots: absolute,
- repo catalogs/rules/workflows/runs: relative.


Composition Model
-----------------

PLEB resolves configuration in this order:

1. code defaults,
2. TOML config values,
3. CLI overrides (for example ``--set key=value``).

Operationally:

- keep baseline behavior in TOML,
- use CLI overrides for temporary experiments,
- persist successful override changes back to TOML.


Workflow Layout Pattern
-----------------------

For production-quality multi-stage execution:

1. workflow file in ``configs/workflows/`` references step files in
   ``configs/workflows/steps/``;
2. step A writes to branch ``X``;
3. step B sets ``fix_base_branch = "X"`` and writes to branch ``Y``;
4. step C sets base ``Y`` and applies final mutations.

This keeps each transformation stage auditable.


Catalog vs Rule Boundary
------------------------

A common confusion is where overlap/relabel data should live.

Use this distinction:

- If it is primarily lookup data (table-like, broadly reused), use
  ``configs/catalogs``.
- If it encodes conditional behavior or strategy choice, use
  ``configs/rules``.

Examples:

- jump map table -> ``catalogs/system_tables``.
- prefer-multichannel overlap action policy -> ``rules/overlap``.


Generated State Policy
----------------------

``configs/state/lockfiles`` contains generated lock files.

Recommended practice:

- exploratory ingest: lock strictness relaxed,
- production ingest: lock strictness enforced and lock files tracked.

Do not manually hand-edit lockfiles unless debugging.


Migration Map
-------------

If you still use historical paths, migrate using:

- ``configs/system_tables/...`` ->
  ``configs/catalogs/system_tables/...``
- ``configs/runs/workflow_steps/...`` ->
  ``configs/workflows/steps/...``
- ``configs/settings/*.lock*.json`` ->
  ``configs/state/lockfiles/...``


Maintenance Checklist
---------------------

When adding a new configuration file:

1. place it in the correct role directory,
2. choose a clear mode/intent name,
3. add a top comment showing intended invocation,
4. avoid absolute paths for repo-local assets,
5. update docs examples if user-facing.

When changing layout:

1. update this chapter,
2. update ``configs/README.md``,
3. update path references in docs and tests,
4. update Python defaults that embed paths.


Cross References
----------------

- Overview of settings strategy: :doc:`configuration`
- Full key catalog: :doc:`full_settings_catalog`
- Stage coordination and behavior: :doc:`pleb_deep_dive`
- Run mode usage: :doc:`running_modes`, :doc:`modes`
